---
title: 'Setting Up AREDN on a Mikrotik hAp to use 44net'
date: 2025-06-30
permalink: /posts/2025/06/aredn44/
tags:
  - hamradio
---

This guide will walk you through setting up a Mikrotik hAp device (I used a hAp ac2) to use 44net addresses, bridging AREDN and 44net services between the two networks.  I set up the hAp to broadcast a WiFi hotspot SSID that, when connected to a client, enables access to both 44net and to AREDN resources simultaneously.  I use [44net.cloud](https://www.44net.cloud) to route a network allocation they assigned to me through a Wireguard tunnel that they also assigned.  The tunnel can be configured through their portal to route to the network.  It is likely also possible to do this by decapsulating the ipencap packets from the raspberry pi directly, and using a traditional 44net subnet allocation, but this setup enables me to take the hAp setup to mobile deployments, without worring about the NAT configuration or my ability to forward ipencap traffic at my destination.

I took the following steps for this setup:

1. Obtain and use a 44net IP allocation via 44net.cloud
2. Set up a Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W as a WireGuard gateway router, including NAT and `iptables` firewall with `fail2ban`
3. Connect AREDN node (e.g., hAp2) via the 44Net tunnel
4. Write a script to configure the routing table on the AREDN node, in case it is not peristed on router reboot

## Set up a 44net Allocation and Tunnel from 44net.cloud

This step could be replaced with your existing 44net allocation, but, as I mentioned, I chose to work through the 44net.cloud tunnel service and network allocation generously offered by their service.  Although I have traditional 44net subnets allocated for fixed use, I felt that the tunneled approach would give me some versatility in the deployment behind a variety of WAN connections.  Because I have an interest in computing and networking education, the ability to pack up and redeploy this setup in a mobile environment was advantageous for me.

Go to [https://44net.cloud](https://www.44net.cloud) and create an account

Request a routed subnet (e.g., `44.x.y.z/29`) and a WireGuard tunnel

You'll receive a:

* Tunnel endpoint (e.g., `a.b.c.d:44000`)
* Allocated IP (e.g., `44.i.j.k/32`)
* Route for your subnet via that tunnel by editing the tunnel allocation and specifying static routing to the subnet

## Configure a Raspberry Pi as a Gateway to 44net.cloud for the AREDN Router

Although the router should generally support it, the AREDN firmware does not allow making a non-AREDN Wireguard connection such as the one I am using to connect to 44net.cloud in order to route this network allocation (at least as far as I'm aware at the time of this writing!).  Instead, I've set up a Raspberry Pi Zero 2W to serve this purpose.  I'll connect the pi to the AREDN router via its WiFI LAN Hotspot connection, and give the pi an IP address on the 44net subnet allocation alongside the router, and will set it up for IPv4 forwarding.

### Configure the Wireguard Tunnel

#### Install WireGuard

Here, we create the Wireguard tunnel connection to 44net.cloud from the Raspberry Pi, and configure the IP routes on the pi to send 44net traffic out via this Wireguard interface.  In addition, we route our local 44net subnet out via our LAN connection, so that it goes directly to the AREDN router.  In my case, I'm connected to the AREDN router via a wifi Part 15 connection, so I use `wlan0` for this interface.  If you plug the pi into the AREDN router via Ethernet, you might use `eth0` here instead.

```
sudo apt update
sudo apt install wireguard netfilter-persistent iptables-persistent resolvconf sshpass
```

Create `/etc/wireguard/wg0.conf`, using your 44net subnet allocation for `44.x.y.z/29`, your 44net.cloud Wireguard tunnel keys, and substituting `wlan0` for the LAN interface you're using from the pi to the AREDN node, as well as `44.a.b.c` for your wireguard tunnel client address and `a.b.c.d:44000` for your tunnel endpoint:

```
[Interface]
PrivateKey = <local private key>
Address = 44.a.b.c
DNS = 1.1.1.1,1.0.0.1

PostUp = ip route add 44.x.y.z/29 dev wlan0
PostDown = ip route del 44.x.y.z/29 dev wlan0

[Peer]
PublicKey = <peer public key>
PresharedKey = <preshared key>
Endpoint = a.b.c.d:44000
AllowedIPs = 44.0.0.0/9, 44.128.0.0/10
PersistentKeepalive = 20
```

#### Enable and Start WireGuard

Create `/etc/systemd/system/wg-44net-client.service`:

```
[Unit]
Description=WireGuard Client to 44net (wg0)
After=network-online.target
Wants=network-online.target

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/wg-quick up wg0
ExecStop=/usr/bin/wg-quick down wg0
RemainAfterExit=yes

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

#### Enable the Service for Automatic Startup

```
sudo systemctl enable wg-44net-client
sudo systemctl start wg-44net-client
```

### Set Static IP and Enable IP Forwarding

Set the AREDN router (hap2) to give a static IP to the pi.  For example, if your 44net subnet is `44.a.b.32/29`, then the AREDN router might take `44.a.b.33/29` and the pi could be assigned `44.a.b.34/29` as a DHCP reservation from the AREDN router.

To enable IPv4 forwarding, edit `/etc/sysctl.conf` and add or uncomment the following line:

```
net.ipv4.ip_forward=1
```

Apply the changes:

```
sudo sysctl -p
```

### Set up NAT and Firewall on the Pi 

Note that this is a minimal configuration of the firewall to enable the functionality, and should be hardened to filter traffic from the Internet.  This firewall is configured to allow all traffic from AREDN (`10.0.0.0/8`) and 44net (`44.0.0.0/9` and `44.128.0.0/10`), as well as bidirectional AREDN Wireguard tunnels on UDP port `5525`.  We also allow ICMP ping packets, and any established connection packets.  Finally, we masquerade traffic on the 44net.cloud tunnel Wireguard interface `wg0`.  I do not explicitly allow TCP port 22 SSH traffic from the Internet, but rather allow ssh connections via the AREDN and 44net subnets (this is also overly permissive, but is presented this way to demonstrate the functionality).

Edit `/etc/iptables/rules.v4`, substituting your 44net subnet allocation for `44.x.y.z/29`:

```
*nat
:PREROUTING ACCEPT [0:0]
:INPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
:OUTPUT ACCEPT [0:0]
:POSTROUTING ACCEPT [0:0]

-A POSTROUTING -s 44.x.y.z/29 -o wg0 -j MASQUERADE
COMMIT

*filter
:INPUT DROP [0:0]
:FORWARD ACCEPT [0:0]
:OUTPUT ACCEPT [0:0]

# Allow loopback
-A INPUT -i lo -j ACCEPT

# Allow established and related
-A INPUT -m conntrack --ctstate ESTABLISHED,RELATED -j ACCEPT

# Allow ALL traffic from 44.0.0.0/9
-A INPUT -s 44.0.0.0/9 -j ACCEPT

# Allow ALL traffic from 44.128.0.0/10
-A INPUT -s 44.128.0.0/10 -j ACCEPT

# Allow ALL traffic from 10.0.0.0/8
-A INPUT -s 10.0.0.0/8 -j ACCEPT

# Allow AREDN tunnels
-A INPUT -p udp --dport 5525 -j ACCEPT
-A INPUT -p udp --sport 5525 -j ACCEPT

# Optional: Allow ICMP for ping and diagnostics
-A INPUT -p icmp -j ACCEPT

# Forwarding rules: Send AREDN Wireguard traffic from 44net.cloud to the AREDN router
-A FORWARD -m conntrack --ctstate ESTABLISHED,RELATED -j ACCEPT
COMMIT
```

Load and save these rules:

```
sudo iptables-restore < /etc/iptables/rules.v4
sudo netfilter-persistent save
```

### Implement fail2ban on SSH

Install `fail2ban`:

```
sudo apt install fail2ban
```

Create `/etc/fail2ban/jail.local`:

```
[sshd]
enabled = true
backend = systemd
logpath = journal
port = ssh
maxretry = 5
findtime = 600
bantime = 86400
```

Start and Enable `fail2ban`:

```
sudo systemctl enable fail2ban
sudo systemctl start fail2ban
```

## Configure the AREDN Node Router

Configure the node as with a 44net allocation for its local LAN, and specify its IP address (for example, `44.x.y.33/29` for an allocation of `44.x.y.32/29`).  I used `wan0` as a LAN hotspot so that my devices could connect to this router wirelessly over 2.4 ghz, and `wlan1` as a WAN client to my home wireless internet connection.

I also created a tunnel server on my home AREDN router node, to which this new 44net AREDN node connects.  Because my home AREDN node is exposed with a 44net IP address on a different subnet, the two are able to reach each other via the 44net.cloud Wireguard tunnel via the Raspberry pi.  So, I used the 44net address of my home AREDN router as the public IP from which this new node connects.

Finally, I allow WAN access to my LAN nodes (and provide a default route) through the network settings on the main page of the GUI.

## Configure the Routing Table on the AREDN Router

Now, we will configure the AREDN router to route 44net traffic out via the Raspberry Pi, since the pi has a Wireguard connection to the 44net.cloud tunnel.

Custom routes on the AREDN router are overwritten on reboot (as far as I can tell).  In addition, the home directory is `/tmp`, so I was unable to use ssh key login to script the creation of these routes via ssh when the Raspberry pi boots up.  

But, for good measure, I created the following startup script on the AREDN node after logging in via `ssh root@localnode.local.mesh -p 2222` and creating a file `/etc/init.d/customroutes` (substitute `44.x.y.z/29` for your 44net subnet allocation, and `44.x.y.A` for the reserved DHCP address of your Raspberry Pi that you assigned earlier from your AREDN node out of your 44net subnet allocation, in addition to a route for your tunnel endpoint `44.a.b.c` in case it is within one of the routing blocks like `44.0.0.0/9` (so that it doesn't go out over the same interface, but instead over your WAN `10.0.0.1` and `wlan1` (use your WAN gateway IP and interface here):

```
#!/bin/sh /etc/rc.common

START=95
STOP=10

start() {
    logger -t customroutes "Adding custom IP routes"
    sleep 5
    ip rule add to 44.0.0.0/9 lookup main priority 5 
    ip rule add to 44.128.0.0/10 lookup main priority 6 
    ip route add 44.0.0.0/9 via 44.x.y.A
    ip route add 44.128.0.0/10 via 44.x.y.A
    ip route add 44.x.y.z/29 dev br-lan
    ip route add 44.a.b.c via 10.0.0.1 dev wlan1
    logger -t customroutes "Custom IP routes added"
}

stop() {
    logger -t customroutes "Removing custom IP routes"
    ip rule del to 44.0.0.0/9 lookup main priority 5 
    ip rule del to 44.128.0.0/10 lookup main priority 6     
    ip route del 44.0.0.0/9 via 44.x.y.A
    ip route del 44.128.0.0/10 via 44.x.y.A
    ip route del 44.x.y.z/29 dev br-lan
    ip route del 44.a.b.c via 10.0.0.1 dev wlan1
    logger -t customroutes "Custom IP routes removed"
}
```

Enable the service to run at startup on the AREDN node (although the node might not respect it):

```
chmod +x /etc/init.d/customroutes
/etc/init.d/customroutes enable
```

### Scripting This from the Rasperry Pi 

In case the AREDN router fails to execute this on startup, I also made a script on the Raspberry Pi to execute these `ip route` commands via ssh.  

On the pi, create a file `/usr/local/bin/setup-mesh-routes.sh` with the same commands and addresses as above:

```
#!/bin/bash

# Define remote host and port
REMOTE_HOST="root@localnode.local.mesh"
REMOTE_PORT=2222

# Run the routing commands over SSH
ssh -p $REMOTE_PORT $REMOTE_HOST << 'EOF'
ip rule add to 44.0.0.0/9 lookup main priority 5 || true
ip rule add to 44.128.0.0/10 lookup main priority 6 || true
ip route add 44.0.0.0/9 via 44.x.y.A || true
ip route add 44.128.0.0/10 via 44.x.y.A || true
ip route add 44.x.y.z/29 dev br-lan || true
ip route add 44.a.b.c via 10.0.0.1 dev wlan1 || true
EOF
```

Executing `/usr/local/bin/setup-mesh-routes.sh` from the raspberry pi will set up the routes.  The `|| true` clause at each line allows the script to continue and exit successfully even if the routes already exist on the router.

#### Automating the Script to Run at Startup

If the AREDN mesh could retain ssh keys for logging in, I could fully automate this by enabling an `init.d` service on the raspberry pi to execute this script whenever the wireless LAN becomes available.  However, since this requires a password, I ssh into the pi and run this script myself.  If you are willing to store your AREDN root password on your pi, you could pass it through the script to call `ssh`.  The `sshpass` program does exactly this, and you can replace the line `ssh -p $REMOTE_PORT $REMOTE_HOST << 'EOF'` with:

```
sshpass -p "$PASSWORD" ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -p $REMOTE_PORT $REMOTE_HOST << 'EOF' 
```

Assuming you've set the `PASSWORD` environment variable in the script, from a file, or from the outside environment.  

In that case, this can be established as a startup service on the pi:

Create the file `/etc/system/system/aredn-routing.service`:

```
[Unit]
Description=Configure IP routes for AREDN on boot
After=network-online.target
Wants=network-online.target

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/setup-mesh-routes.sh
RemainAfterExit=yes

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

Enable it to run at startup via:

```
sudo systemctl daemon-reexec
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable aredn-routing.service
sudo systemctl start aredn-routing.service
```