---
title: 'Setting Up AllStarLink ASL3 and Associated Tools'
date: 2025-01-10
permalink: /posts/2025/01/asl3/
tags:
  - hamradio
---

This guide walks you through installing and configuring AllStarLink (ASL3) along with several helpful management tools and utilities:

- allscan
- supermon
- allmon3
- skywarn plus
- dvswitch
- digital_link
- alltune

## Step 1: Install ASL3

1. **Prepare the Raspberry Pi**:
   - Download and install the Raspberry Pi Imager.
   - Select Lite 64-bit OS and configure username, password, and enable SSH.
   - Flash the microSD card and boot the Raspberry Pi.

2. **Install ASL3**:
   ```bash
   sudo -s
   apt update && apt upgrade
   cd /tmp
   wget https://repo.allstarlink.org/public/asl-apt-repos.deb12_all.deb
   dpkg -i asl-apt-repos.deb12_all.deb
   apt update
   apt install git asl3
   ```

3. **Configure ASL3**:
   - Run the ASL configuration menu:
     ```bash
     asl-menu
     ```
   - Adjust node settings as needed and save.
   - For my setup, I set CTCSS From to `usb` instead of `usbinvert`

Access ASL3 at `http://<your_ip_address>:9090`.

## Step 2: Configure ASL3 Components

### SimpleUSB Configuration
Edit the `simpleusb.conf` file to set up your hardware interface:
```bash
nano /etc/asterisk/simpleusb.conf
```

### Configure Audio Levels
Restart Asterisk and test the setup:
```bash
asterisk -r
rpt fun <your_node_number> *355553
```

Speak into the microphone and adjust the audio settings so that the meter just touches the 5kHz level.  Disconnect when done with:

```bash
rpt fun <your_node_number> *155553
```

To set the audio transmit level, edit `/etc/asterisk/simpleusb.conf` and set the `rxmixerset` value.  I went with a value around `650`, such that running `asterisk -rvvv` (after restarting asterisk) and `rpt debug level 7` decodes and displays DTMF codes being sent and audio levels "just about right" or at least just a bit low when testing on node `55553`.  I found that setting the audio level to the "just about right" setting caused the DTMF tones to be oversaturated and fail to decode, so I adjusted this to a slightly lower value.

### Test AllStarLink Connection

Connect to Allstar Echo node: `40894` via the radio by entering `*340894` to connect (and speak / echo), and `*140894` to disconnect.

### Allmon3 Setup
1. Install Allmon3:
   ```bash
   apt install allmon3
   ```

2. Configure Allmon3 settings in `/etc/allmon3/allmon3.ini` according to [these instructions](https://github.com/VALER24/allstar-shari-dvswitch-install-guide).  Be sure to remove the `allmon3` user account and add an admin password:

   Update passwords:
   ```bash
   allmon3-passwd --delete allmon3
   allmon3-passwd admin
   ```
   
   Uncomment / set account and `manager.conf` secret for node 1999.

3. Restart services:
   ```bash
   systemctl restart asterisk
   systemctl start allmon3
   ```

Access Allmon3 at `http://<your_ip_address>/allmon3`.

### Echolink Setup
Edit the following files to configure Echolink: `/etc/asterisk/echolink.conf` and `/etc/asterisk/modules.conf`.

In `/etc/asterisk/modules.conf`, add or uncomment this line: `load => chan_echolink.so`.  If there is a similar line with `noload =>`, comment that out.

In /etc/asterisk/echolink.conf, add your AllStarLink node number and set your personal EchoLink information.

Load the Echolink module and restart Asterisk:
```bash
systemctl restart asterisk
```

Test by connecting to `*33009999` (EchoLink echo test 9999); then `*13009999` to disconnect.  To connect to an EchoLink node, dial `*33` followed by a 6 digit EchoLink node number.  If the node number is fewer than 6 digits long, prepend the node number with enough zeroes to make a 6 digit number.  For example, EchoLink node `9999` is entered as `009999`.  

## Step 3: Install and Configure DVSwitch          
1. Install DVSwitch:

   ```bash
   wget http://dvswitch.org/bookworm
   chmod +x bookworm
   ./bookworm
   apt update
   apt install dvswitch-server
   apt install php-cgi libapache2-mod-php8.2
   ```

2. Configure DVSwitch:

   ```bash
   cd /usr/local/dvs
   ./dvs
   ```
   
   You can set modes from the `dvs` menu under `Advanced - Configure Other Stanzas (Edit <mode>)`, `Additional DMR Networks`, and `Configure Favorite TG`.  Additionally, you may be able to set up DV3000 USB as the vocoder here if available for D-Star support under the initial setup menu, in the `Hardware Vocoder` section (for example, if you have a USB ThumbDV AMBE vocoder device).

3. Edit configuration files as needed:
   In `/opt/Analog_Bridge/Analog_Bridge.ini`, under `[USRP]`, set:

   ```
   txPort = 32001                          ; Transmit USRP frames on this port
   rxPort = 34001                          ; Listen for USRP frames on this port
   usrpAudio  AUDIO_USE_GAIN
   usrpGain = 3.00
   tlvAudio = AUDIO_USE_GAIN
   ```
   
   In `/opt/MMDVM_Bridge/MMDVM_Bridge.ini`, set `Jitter=750` under `[DMR Network]`, and set  `RX/TXFrequency` to `433800000` under `[Info]`.  You can also set your contact information in this file.

4. Set up private node `1999` in ASL3 to bridge to DVSwitch:

    ```bash
    sudo asl-menu
    ```

    Under `Node Settings - AllStar Node Settings - Add Node` with the following parameters: node number 1999, "None of the Above", "Radio Interface USRP", and "Duplex Type 0 / Half".

    Test by connecting/disconnecting to node 1999 in allmon3.  You must connect your ASL node to 1999 before using DVSwitch.  You can dial `*31999` to do this (and `*11999` to disconnect).

5. Enable and start DVSwitch services:
   ```bash
   systemctl enable analog_bridge mmdvm_bridge md380-emu
   systemctl start analog_bridge mmdvm_bridge md380-emu
   ```

6. Test DVSwitch:

   ```bash
   /opt/MMDVM_Bridge/dvswitch.sh mode YSF
   /opt/MMDVM_Bridge/dvswitch.sh tune parrot.ysfreflector.de:42020
   ```
   
   In general, you can connect to any mode and endpoint via:
   
   ```bash
   /opt/MMDVM_Bridge/dvswitch.sh mode {DMR|NXDN|P25|YSF|DSTAR} # Set Analog_Bridge digital mode
   /opt/MMDVM_Bridge/dvswitch.sh tune <tg> # Tune to specific TG number/Reflector
   ```
   
   Don't forget to connect to node 1999 either through DTMF tones, or through allmon3.  You can change digital modes using the web interface at `http://<your_ip_address>/index.php`.

7. Enable DVSwitch Mode Switcher Frontend:

    ```bash
    sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade && sudo apt install git nodejs
    git clone https://github.com/firealarmss/dvswitch_mode_switcher.git
    cd dvswitch_mode_switcher
    ```
    
    Follow the instructions in dvswitch_mode_switcher-README.md.txt within the above repository.

    ```bash
    cd /opt/dvswitch_mode_switcher
    cp debian/dvswitch_mode_switcher.service /etc/systemd/system/dvswitch_mode_switcher.service
    systemctl daemon-reload
    systemctl enable dvswitch_mode_switcher.service
    systemctl start dvswitch_mode_switcher.service
    ```

    Then, log onto the ASL3 Cockpit at `http://<your_ip_address>:9090` to update the firewall to allow port `3000` access.  After logging in, click `Networking` on the left, click `Edit Rules and Zones` in the firewall panel, click `Custom Ports`, and enable port `3000` over `TCP`.

    Access the portal via `http://<your_ip_address>:3000`.  Again, be sure to connect to node 1999 first!  You can edit your favorite digital talkgroups by editing the `/opt/dvswitch_mode_switcher/configs/tg_alias.yml` file.  For example:
    
    ```
    - tgid: "yourbrandmeisterpasswordhere@3102.repeater.net:62031!4000"
      alias: Brandmeister Unlink
    ```
    
## Step 4: Install and Configure Supermon
1. Install Supermon:

   ```bash
   cd /usr/local/sbin
   wget "http://2577.asnode.org:43856/supermonASL_fresh_install" -O supermonASL_fresh_install
   chmod +x supermonASL_fresh_install
   ./supermonASL_fresh_install
   ```

2. Configure Supermon:
   - Edit `allmon.ini` and `global.inc` in `/var/www/html/supermon/`.
   - Set up `.htpasswd` for authentication:
   
     ```bash
     htpasswd -cB /var/www/html/supermon/.htpasswd admin
     ```

3. Enable automatic database updates:

   ```bash
   systemctl enable asl3-update-astdb.service asl3-update-astdb.timer
   systemctl start asl3-update-astdb.timer
   ```

4. Access Supermon at `http://<your_ip_address>/supermon`.

5. Update supermon with `/usr/local/sbin/supermonASL_latest_update`

6. Edit `/var/www/html/supermon/almon.ini` to modify the top menu.  For example, you can add links to all the URLs from the tools in this document for easy access.

## Step 5: Configure Skywarn Plus

```bash
bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Mason10198/SkywarnPlus/main/swp-install)"
```

### Configuration

1. Configure `/usr/local/bin/SkywarnPlus/config.yaml` file according to readme instructions.

2. Add these lines to enable weather alert tail messages at a certain interval of activity:

   ```
   tailmessagetime=60000
   tailsquashedtime=30000
   tailmessagelist=/tmp/SkywarnPlus/wx-tail
   ```

3. Add to root crontab:

   ```
   * * * * * /usr/bin/python3 /usr/local/bin/SkywarnPlus/ASL3_Supermon_Workaround.py
   * * * * * /usr/local/bin/SkywarnPlus/SkywarnPlus.py
   * * * * * chown -R asterisk:asterisk /tmp/SkywarnPlus 
   ```

4. Follow [these instructions](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lv95j-I3JDc) to add time and weather hourly announcements.  Add or modify your root crontab as follows:

   ```
   00 00-23 * * * /usr/bin/perl /usr/local/sbin/saytime.pl 19320 62933 > /dev/null
   ```
   
## Allscan
Follow [these instructions](https://github.com/davidgsd/AllScan#readme).

```bash
sudo apt update; sudo apt install php unzip -y
cd ~
wget 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/davidgsd/AllScan/main/AllScanInstallUpdate.php'
chmod 755 AllScanInstallUpdate.php
sudo ./AllScanInstallUpdate.php
```

Edit `/etc/php/8.2/cli/php.ini` and uncomment `extension=pdo_sqlite` and `extension=sqlite3`.

Test at `http://<your-ip-address>/allscan` (set up initial user).  You can now use allscan to connect/disconnect instead of allmon3 or DTMF.

Edit favorite nodes at `/var/www/html/supermon/favorites.ini`:

```
label[] = "Label"
cmd[] = "rpt cmd %node% ilink 3 <node number>"
label[] = "Echolink Label"
cmd[] = "rpt cmd %node% ilink 3 3<0 prepadded 6 digit node number>"
```

## Alltune

Follow the instructions at the download provided [here](https://www.qrz.com/db/N1ACC?aliasFrom=KQ4MZJ3).  Extract the web files to `/var/www/html/alltune` and access at `http://<your-ip-address>/alltune`.

## IAX Configuration

You can access your AllStarNode from an Android device or other IAX connection by adding the following stanza to `/etc/asterisk/iax.conf`:

```
[iaxclient]                      ; Connect from iax client (Zoiper...)
type = friend                    ; Notice type here is friend <--------------
context = iax-client             ; Context to jump to in extensions.conf
auth = md5
secret = your-secret-password-here
host = dynamic
disallow = all
allow = ulaw
allow = adpcm
allow = gsm
transfer = no
requirecalltoken=no ; to allow all connections
;calltokenoptional=0.0.0.0/0.0.0.0 ; to connect from a particular IP address
```

And add this in the `/etc/asterisk/extensions.conf` file:

```
[iax-client]                            ; for IAX VoIP clients.
exten => ${NODE},1,Ringing()
        same => n,Wait(10)
        same => n,Answer()
        same => n,Set(CALLSIGN=${CALLERID(name)})
        same => n,NoOp(Caller ID name is ${CALLSIGN})
        same => n,NoOp(Caller ID number is ${CALLERID(number)})
        same => n,GotoIf(${ISNULL(${CALLSIGN})}?hangit)
        same => n,Playback(rpt/connected-to&rpt/node)
        same => n,SayDigits(${NODE})
        same => n,rpt(${NODE}|P|${CALLSIGN}-P)
        same => n(hangit),NoOp(No Caller ID Name)
        same => n,Playback(connection-failed)
        same => n,Wait(1)
        same => n,Hangup
```
	
You can then configure DroidStar by adding the following in the `Hosts` section: `IAX <your node number> <your node IP address> 4569 iaxclient your-secret-password-here`, and choose your node under the `IAX` hosts section on the main tab.  You might have to update your databases and hosts with the buttons under `Settings` prior to use.  Once connected, you can issue DTMF codes to connect/disconnect, and use the PTT button to transmit.

## Digital Link DTMF Tuning

### Installation and Configuration

Clone this repository to your AllStar node `/opt` directory, via:

```
cd /opt
git clone https://github.com/BillJr99/digital_link
```

Within the `digital_link` directory, there is a minimal amount of configuration.  Copy the file `switch_modes.conf.sample` to `switch_modes.conf`, and create as many sections as you like.  Some modes do not need all the fields, and these are set to NA in the template.  The `modemaster` defines the first two DTMF tones one will send to link to that mode and master.  For example, `12` will select the TGIF network on DMR, since `1` represents DMR, and `2` represents TGIF. Ensure that all masters within the same mode have the same first `modemaster` digit: for example, all DMR networks should have a first `modemaster` digit of `1`, and all D-STAR networks should have a first `modemaster` digit of `2`.  The actual digit is your choice, as long as you do not select `0` for the mode or the master digit (these are reserved for unlinking).  Set the `mode` to `DMR`, `D-STAR`, `YSF`, `NXDN`, or `P25` as appropriate, as well as the host, port, and password, if applicable.

Within `digital_link.sh`, set your AllStar node number and linked digital node (i.e., `1999`) for `NODE_ID` and `LINKED_NODE_ID`, respectively.

Finally, ensure that `/opt/digital_link/dvswitch_links.log` is owned by the `asterisk` user, and that the `digital_link.sh` script is executable:

```
sudo touch dvswitch_links.log
sudo chown asterisk:asterisk dvswitch_links.log
chmod a+x digital_link.sh
```

### switch_modes.conf Example

```
[DMR_BrandMeister]
modemaster=11
mode=DMR
url=3102.master.brandmeister.network
port=62031
password=PASSWORD
type=NA

[DMR_TGIF]
modemaster=12
mode=DMR
url=tgif.network
port=62031
password=PASSWORD
type=NA

[DMR_DMRPLUS]
modemaster=13
mode=DMR
url=45.79.197.51
port=55555
password=PASSWORD
type=NA

[DSTAR_REF]
modemaster=21
mode=D-STAR
url=NA
port=NA
password=NA
type=REF

[DSTAR_XLX]
modemaster=22
mode=D-STAR
url=NA
port=NA
password=NA
type=XLX

[DSTAR_DCS]
modemaster=23
mode=D-STAR
url=NA
port=NA
password=NA
type=DCS

[DSTAR_XRF]
modemaster=24
mode=D-STAR
url=NA
port=NA
password=NA
type=XRF

[YSF_PARROT]
modemaster=31
mode=YSF
url=register.ysfreflector.de
port=42020
password=NA
type=NA

[YSF_USALINK]
modemaster=32
mode=YSF
url=americalink.hamfm.com
port=42000
password=NA
type=NA

[YSF_KCWIDE]
modemaster=33
mode=YSF
url=ysf.kansascitywide.com
port=42000
password=NA
type=NA

[NXDN]
modemaster=41
mode=NXDN
url=NA
port=NA
password=NA
type=NA

[P25]
modemaster=51
mode=P25
url=NA
port=NA
password=NA
type=NA
```

### Mapping to Asterisk

You can assign a dialplan to Asterisk so that the DTMF tones for a given code pattern will be forwarded to this script.  I used `AA` as my entry code, and recommend choosing the same two-digit/character sequence.  This is important because the `rpt.conf` will read and consume the first digit, and then pass the remaining to the dialplan.  The second digit allows the dialplan to match the rest of the string, in case you have other dialplan patterns in place.  This resulting string (starting with a single `A`) is passed to the script for parsing.

#### `/etc/asterisk/rpt.conf`

Modify `rpt.conf` under the `[functions]` section by adding the following line (replace `A` with the DTMF tone you'd like to match to run the script):

```
A = autopatchup,context=digital_link,noct=1,farenddisconnect=1,dialtime=60000,quiet=1
```

#### `/etc/asterisk/extensions.conf`

Modify `extensions.conf` by adding the following stanza (again, replace `_A.` with `_@.`, where `@` is the DTMF tone you used in `rpt.conf` above):

```
[digital_link]
; Match extensions explicitly ending with D
exten => _A.,1,GotoIf($["${EXTEN:-1}"="D"]?ends_with_D:normal)
; If it ends with D, replace the last character with #
exten => _A.,n(ends_with_D),System(/opt/digital_link/digital_link.sh ${EXTEN:0:-1}#)
exten => _A.,n,Hangup
; If it does not end with D, process normally
exten => _A.,n(normal),System(/opt/digital_link/digital_link.sh ${EXTEN})
exten => _A.,n,Hangup
```

### Usage

Assuming you used `A` to start the `autopatch` and for the `exten` rules above, you can send the following DTMF tones to your AllStarLink node to activate DVSwitch, change/unlink modes, and change/unlink talkgroups.  All commands will begin with `*AA`.  The first `A` is provided to Asterisk, the second `A` is matched by the autopatch extension rules, and the entire string starting with (and including) the second `A` is passed to the `digital_link.sh` script and parsed.

```
*AA <mode digit> <master> <optional TG> <optional D key>
```

* `<mode digit>`: The mode digit is the first digit in `switch_modes.conf` that corresponds to the `modemaster` of the master and/or talkgroup you wish to connect to.  For example, DMR corresponds to `1`, and D-STAR corresponds to `2` in the template provided by `switch_modes.conf`.
* `<master>`: The master digit is the second digit in `switch_modes.conf` that corresponds to the `modemaster` of the master and/or talkgorup you wish to connect to.  For example, Brandmeister corresponds to `1` and TGIF corresponds to `2` for DMR, and REF corresponds to `1` and XLX corresponds to `2` for D-STAR.  
* `<TG>`: The talkgroup you wish to connect to; for example, 9999.  This can be omitted if there is no specific talkgroup on the master being connected to (i.e., when using YSF).  On D-STAR, this is the numeric component, so to connect to `REF030C`, one would press the digit corresponding to `REF` for the `<master>` digit previously, and then enter `030C`.
* `<optional D key>`: Sending the `D` DTMF tone at the end of the command indicates that a private call should be made on DMR, or to link to the `Echo` repeater on D-STAR.  This is translated to a `#` character and passed to DVSwitch as either a escaped `#` character, or as the `E` echo tone on D-STAR, as appropriate.

#### Linking

The first time you issue one of these commands, Asterisk will unlink from any connected nodes other than your digital-analog bridge node (i.e., `1999`), and link to your digital-analog bridge node if it wasn't already linked.

#### Examples

These examples assume the stock configuration in `digital_link.sh`, with spaces added to the commands for clarity (note that the entire set of tones is entered as a single transmission):

* Connect to REF030C on D-STAR: `*AA 21 030C`
* Connect to REF001E on D-STAR: `*AA 21 001D`
* Connect to 9990 (Private call) on DMR Brandmeister: `*AA 11 9990D`
* Connect to TG 91 on DMR Brandmeister: `*AA 11 91`
* Connect to Parrot on YSF: `*AA 31`
* Connect to AmericaLink on YSF: `*AA 32`
* Connect to TG 101 on DMR TGIF: `*AA 12 101`

#### Unlinking

When you switch modes, the unlink command for the current mode is issued.  You can force an unlink by entering `*AA 0`.  If you wish to unlink from the current digital mode and also unlink from your digital-analog bridge node entirely on AllStar, you can enter `*AA 00`.

## References

- [DVSwitch Installation Guide](https://dvswitch.org/DVSwitch_install.pdf)
- [Supermon for ASL3](http://2577.asnode.org:43856/supermonASL_fresh_install)
- [DVSwitch Mode Changer](https://github.com/firealarmss/dvswitch_mode_switcher)
- [ASL3 Installation Guide by Ham Radio and Networking](https://github.com/VALER24/allstar-shari-dvswitch-install-guide)
- [ASL3 Installation Video by Ham Radio and Networking on Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bNp-zZQKI-I)
- [Ham Radio Crusader Youtube Channel for Information on ASL3, DVSwitch, Supermon, SkywarnPlus, and more](https://www.youtube.com/@HamRadioCrusader)
- [Installing Supermon on ASL3](http://www.hamradiolife.org/documents/Supermon%20for%20ASL%203.pdf)
- [DVSwitch Installation](https://dvswitch.org/DVSwitch_install.pdf)
- [Allmon3 and EchoLink on ASL3 by Ham Radio and Networking on Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GRMsifz9WTg)
- [DVSwitch and ClearNode on AllStar by Ham Radio and Networking on Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uAwSHjKTeU4)
- [DVSwitch on AllStarLink 3 by Ham Radio and Networking on Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9k_gAfXJgx8)
- DVSwitch Server [Part 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q73vW2tZVco) and [Part 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HlVs9rC5pgE) by Ham Radio Crusader on Youtube
- [ASL3 Cockpit Firewall](https://allstarlink.github.io/pi/cockpit-firewall/)
- [SkywarnPlus on ASL3 by Ham Radio Crusader](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=35k1sND7FbQ)
- [Supermon 7.4+ on ASL3 by Ham Radio Crusader](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3SyCHa03pN8)
- [Supermon for ASL3](http://www.hamradiolife.org/documents/Supermon%20for%20ASL%203.pdf)
- [Time and Weather Announcements on SkywarnPlus by Ham Radio Crusader](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lv95j-I3JDc)
- [AllScan Setup Instructions](https://github.com/davidgsd/AllScan#readme)
- [Alltune](https://www.qrz.com/db/N1ACC?aliasFrom=KQ4MZJ3)
