---
title: "Development and Specification of a Reference Model for Agent-Based Systems"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/smc2009
excerpt: 'IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews)'
date: '2009-09-05'
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and Cybernetics'
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4926156'
citation: 'William Regli, Israel Mayk, Christopher J. Dugan, Joseph B. Kopena, Robert N. Lass, Pragnesh Jay Modi, William M. Mongan, Jeff K. Salvage and Evan A. Sultanik. Development and Specification of a Reference Model for Agent-Based Systems.  IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, September 2009.'
---

Agent-based systems have been the object of intense research over the past decade. While great theoretical progress has been made, the software frameworks for creating agent-based systems offer considerable variability in their capabilities and functionality. This paper introduces a reference model for agent-based systems. The purpose of a reference model is to provide a common conceptual basis for comparing systems and driving the development of software architectures and other standards. The Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents and other groups have advanced a number of agent standards, yet, to date, no comprehensive reference model has been presented for software systems composed of agents. This paper provides an overview of a reference model for agent-based systems. The agent systems reference model is the result of a multiyear effort studying software systems built with agents and software frameworks for implementing these systems. As part of this study, the team applied software reverse engineering techniques to perform static and dynamic analysis of operational agent-based systems. This analysis enabled identification of key common concepts across over one dozen different agent frameworks. To demonstrate its applicability, the reference model is then used to analyze a number of complete agent-based software systems. It is the belief of the authors that the reference model will be an essential prerequisite for future transition, deployment, and integration of agent-based systems.
